What is B2B?
It is an unusual industry called B2B or industrial marketing.
Many companies are engaged in this business.
It is from this business that the business of medium and small businesses in the regions of Russia began.
Companies began to sell raw materials, components, machines, equipment, tractors and much more.
So, B2B marketing.
A few words about the specifics of positioning, but first the definition.
Industrial marketing is a concept describing the marketing of goods and services, organization for organization, business to business.
Organization in this case means the organization of all types, commercial, non-commercial, private, public, state, manufacturers and sellers.
There are features of the buyer's behavior in industrial marketing that determine how the positioning should be built.
The first feature is that potential buyers can be individually identified.
We know exactly who will buy from us, unlike B2C marketing, where we do not understand who will come to the store and who will take our product off the shelf.
The second difference is that the decision-making process is organized.
Each company has certain procedures in accordance with which the company makes decisions.
When we talk about marketing, for this industry, we must understand that it must help us make decisions in our favor.
The third feature is that the purchase is carried out professionally.
Of course, this cannot be said about all companies that buy our products.
But in general, we assume that when we sell an industrial product, we face a system in which people participate, who call themselves professionals.
They use some criteria that are important to them.
And the fourth is the high probability of a repeat purchase.
Maybe this is the happiest time when the company has come to the point that its customers have become permanent customers.
The efforts to find new customers are slowing down, and the company receives current revenues without increasing its efforts and energy to find new customers.
This slide shows the specifics of marketing, industrial and consumer, and shows the future of Russian companies that work in both marketing.
Look, from the point of view of the product, the development of products in the system of industrial marketing is linear.
Computers are improving, their capacity is increasing, the production of equipment is increasing.
In consumer marketing, everything happens in a cyclical manner.
Men wear suits with three buttons, then two, then one, then three again.
This cyclicity is repeated with slight fluctuations.
Therefore, the second element of the product that strikes us and makes us adapt is the incentive.
In industrial marketing, technology is very important.
Technology, how everything is built, what we give, how we change.
In consumer marketing, fashion is important, and therefore a marketer is required to form fashion.
A consumer in industrial marketing chooses based on objective criteria.
Objective criteria are difficult to break.
In consumer marketing, people choose based on subjective criteria.
When you sell clothes, you understand that people have the most diverse criteria.
One likes brown, the other likes red, the third likes gray, the fourth likes blue.
It is difficult for us to choose, but this determines our marketing activity.
And finally, look, consumers in industrial marketing usually use the left hemisphere.
It is assumed that they are very rational, they compare the criteria of choice, and then say,
we will buy the product from this company.
Consumer marketing has such a property.
We know that in many cases the client is irrational.
He is guided by the right hemisphere, and this hemisphere controls our emotions.
And finally, two more aspects that always interest me.
The macro-cultural aspect.
Two cultures. In industrial marketing, science is very important.
Your promotion, your positioning should look scientific.
And in consumer marketing, art is important.
And finally, another cultural aspect.
If in industrial marketing the scope is global,
it means that everything that is created in the West, in the field of technology,
in the field of computerization, sooner or later comes to us.
With small changes, the consumer sector demonstrates a huge specificity related to cultural boundaries.
This means that the marketer should understand the countries in which he lives.
The conclusion that I will make now is very unusual.
I predict that in industrial marketing, in the conditions of globalization,
and the entry of Russia into the world trade organization,
it will be difficult for many marketologists.
Because they do not determine anything significant.
And what is developed there will be duplicated here.
But I am sure that the workplace of a marketer in consumer marketing will remain for the Russians.
Because no one, as a Russian, knows the specifics of this culture.
And I do not think that neither the French, nor the Americans, nor the Germans
can interpret the stimulating motives of consumers better than, for example, Russian marketologists.
And finally, the last analogy of professions.
If industrial marketing is more about lawyers and doctors,
then consumer marketing is about politicians and showmen.
I always look at this picture and say,
where would you like to do marketing?
What would you like to do in marketing?
Consumer or industrial?
And I am often told, of course, consumer.
It is very uninteresting and ambiguous, and, one might say,
it is forecasted by industrial marketing.
But that is why it determines that there are certain difficulties
related to segmentation and positioning of products.
For industrial marketing, for the B2B sector,
what is called the point of contact is very important.
Any promotion is built on this.
And I would like to say that if you work in this area,
then maybe the most important thing you should do
is, first, to determine the market segments,
which we talked about at the beginning of our lesson,
and then to say what are the points of contact with the clients,
with those rational clients who accept based on certain objective criteria.
Look at my example, which shows that
when we sell equipment, metals, raw materials, components,
we must understand that we should have a good website,
a good office, good business cards that we give to our clients,
we should look good at the exhibitions we participate in,
we should set up a place for sale, especially our negotiating place,
and finally we should have a suitable advertising,
which is often very irrational and explains to the client why it should come.
I say this because maybe this is the basis of promotion.
Do not build illusions that industrial marketing will never be like consumer marketing.
It is much more boring and irrational, but it has its own charm.
Even in this you should apply the elements of art,
show the beauty and value of the brand you offer to the market.
This is the essence of positioning.
Positioning is solved in some small operations,
which are related to the fact that the client should see the distinctive features of your company
and differentiate it by the office, by the website, by the business cards, by the exhibitions,
by the negotiating place, that is, the place of sale and by your advertising.
And finally, the most interesting thing.
In 2000, two researchers Rust and Lehmann for the first time proposed an unusual concept
that will be different from what we call marketing in B2B,
namely the concept of consumer capital.
What is it?
The authors consider consumer capital as a set of separate controllable factors,
and consumers themselves as the company's financial asset.
This is such an unusual view,
because traditionally marketing assumes that we have goods and services that need to be sold to the client.
They saw for the first time a different value when we work in industrial marketing.
The client often buys.
And what should be done to remove the word goods and concentrate on consumers?
The term they have chosen is very interesting, consumer capital.
And for me, the conclusion is very important.
The danger of slave-like pursuit of product profitability without a focus on the consumer.
So what should be done to make our consumer our capital,
to make him bring more and more money?
There are certain rules for this.
Three rules that must be followed.
If I want to adjust,
then we must build our positioning and differentiation
on the basis of three controllable factors of consumer capital.
The first factor is called the capital of value.
The second factor is called the capital of the brand.
And the third factor is the capital of retention.
In all three factors there is a differentiation of the company
that we must carry through this policy towards our clients.
The first factor is the capital of value.
What does it mean?
When a client wants to buy a product from an industrial enterprise,
he always weighs certain offers.
Be it our offer with the offer of competitors,
or offers with your desired factors,
for example, with your budget.
This is the first one.
The capital of value is very important when,
for example, the monetary value of the loyalty program is very high.
And two other factors are very important
when the relationship of the learner between the consumer and the company
is very strong.
So I wanted to show you that there are certain rules
that suggest that if you want to attract for the first time,
you should think about what to do
to try to limit the movement of our client
and go to another supplier.
Remember, the first offer is very important,
so that your offer is much more profitable than the competitor's.
Remember that if you do not have a good loyalty program,
then the capital of value should be very significant.
Remember that if you create a training type of relationship with the client
as an element of the initial offer,
this also creates a strong connection.
Remember that you must create such conditions
so that it is very difficult for the client to switch to your competitor.
How can you increase the capital of value?
There are a few ways, but the simplest one is to offer a higher value to the consumer.
Quality and convenience, or offer the same value as the competitor,
but at a lower price.
Whatever we do, we should start from the following.
When we create an offer on the market,
we should say that yes, we can sell the same thing at a higher price,
but then we lower the capital of value
and remove one of the elements of consumer capital,
which is very important for our business.
Next slide.
The second element.
Whatever we offer on the market, at what price,
we will always be present in the market of price competition
if we do not recognize that another factor that affects our choice is the brand.
This is especially important for those companies
that are difficult to assess the quality of the product or service before purchase.
For example, it is very difficult to assess the service in marketing.
Yes, services can also be B2B.
Services can also be for B2B industries, for example.
We hold seminars, we consult enterprises.
In fact, we work in the B2B industry and at the same time this service.
It is very difficult to assess the quality of the product or service in the first place.
And so when we talk about how much it can cost,
we must say if we have the capital of the brand.
If we do not have it, we will always have to sell at the lowest price.
And we compete with the same companies that sell at a low price
and therefore offer another damping.
Compare the brands that are here.
I wanted to show you.
Tell me which of these pens is better?
Visconti, Omas, Waterman or Parker?
In principle, there is nothing in these pens.
But people who buy them probably refer to the brand and its fame to a greater extent.
In the same way, it is sometimes very important for many companies to spend money on the brand.
Western companies allocate huge budgets to form the image of the brand.
Russian companies that sell metal say,
why pay the percentage to the seller and not do anything else?
Remember, we are slowly pushing ourselves into the abyss of price competition.
And in the end, the day will come when we will be put off the market.
And yet, let's go back to this slide.
Tell me which of the pens you like better.
What do you think, what has this pen achieved?
What has it created?
The capital of the brand for itself.
Next slide.
Three roles of the capital of the brand that are very important.
The brand is important for the B2B industry,
and to a lesser extent for B2C,
because it acts as a magnet attracting new consumers to the company.
For example, Volvo and Scania became the market for commercial vehicles in Russia.
People want to buy Volvo trucks, people want to buy Volvo buses.
And it's hard to explain, because from a rational point of view,
these are very expensive buses and trucks,
but for some reason people in Russia prefer them.
Volvo is just a small part of this market segment.
And of course, competitors who want to push Volvo face problems.
How to do it?
They often dump, lowering prices, but Volvo doesn't lose its share of the market.
Because Volvo created what we call the capital of the brand.
Second.
Our brand acts as a business card for reminding people about goods and services.
This brand helps us, helps marketers to promote this product.
But the most important thing is that sellers are most grateful for this brand,
because they have to contact customers,
and they often have to explain why the same product costs more.
And finally, the last one.
The brand usually provides emotional connection between the consumer and the company.
It creates something invisible that makes people turn to this product.
Pay attention to how you are dressed.
We are a tool of brand policy, a tool of marketing.
Someone ties us to some brand,
what watches we wear, what clothes we wear.
In the same way, we face problems in industrial marketing.
The consumer often says,
no, we should use these trucks.
It is difficult to convince Coca-Cola in Russia that it should not use Volvo trucks.
Because there is an emotional connection between the consumer and the company,
which was created by Volvo back then in the Western market.
And today the company does not even want to consider the question of alternatives.
There are certain rules that say that when we think about how to adjust to competitors,
we should measure the brand that adjusts, differentiates us.
I liked that the authors of this model said that if you want to understand whether the brand differentiates you or not,
measure the awareness of the brand,
the emotions that the brand causes,
the attitude to the brand,
whether people are happy, happy, proud, or just laughing,
and finally, the brand ethics.
The most painful thing in Russia is that we have to face such a situation.
We are well aware, even better in emotions,
and ready to generate absolutely creative,
absolutely new creative ideas related to advertising.
But we do not want to notice the brand ethics.
I think that sooner or later,
a company that uses so-called scandalous marketing,
provocative marketing,
will face the problem that Russian consumers will begin to evaluate the brand ethics.
And the most important, perhaps the last element, is differentiation.
The differentiation of industrial marketing includes another very important element.
It is especially necessary in the third component of the company's work,
which works in B2B industries,
which is the capital retention program.
It is not enough to offer a good product at a reasonable price.
It is not enough to create a brand that is valuable to the client.
It is also important to create a loyalty program,
which is called the capital retention company.
What is capital retention?
This is a tendency shown by the consumer in the form of preference for the brand,
without being explained by the objective and subjective assessments of this brand.
It's just incredible.
How can you explain why a client wants to buy from this company?
Why does he not want to switch to another company?
Indeed, it is even difficult to ask why,
because people do not think about it.
It is the Russians who express such a point of view for the first time.
If you want to be a successful company,
think about how to keep your clients.
Of course, there are Russian companies that are inclined to measure the loyalty of the client
by various types of sales and discounts.
I believe that is why people come to them again and again.
But in reality, we are still facing an unusual situation.
As a rule, loyalty programs for many Russian companies are negative.
We want to accept that there are preferences
that are not explained by objective assessments, but by something else.
What is it?
Companies build up their capital retention,
offering their consumers benefits,
which make it more expensive for them to switch to the product of their competitors.
What does this mean in reality?
We create such working conditions for the client,
which implies that if our client switches to our competitor
and starts buying his product,
he faces inexplicable difficulties from the point of view of the consumer.
For example, discomfort in communication,
discomfort in filling in the forms,
discomfort in explaining the situation, and much more.
I came across an unusual case in Russia,
when one of the companies said,
we are ready to go to the point where our customers
even develop a supply plan,
what they need for the entire program.
Imagine how the company serves the client deeply,
how deeply it concerns its needs,
that, for example, employees who work at the company of the buyer
are ready to give their own function,
for example, the calculation of the needs in metal,
which is completed by another organization,
knowing that it will do it better.
In general, such parasitization of the supplier's competencies
leads to the fact that the client is very connected,
because if this supplier leaves,
he will have to develop the program himself.
I'm not used to doing this anymore,
I'm used to demonstrating it in the best possible way,
for example, in PowerPoint, in front of the board of directors.
Secondly, in order to connect the client,
in order not to give him the opportunity to switch to our competitors,
there are several ways in accordance with the model of consumer capital.
The first is various options for rewarding repeated purchases.
Yes, the client understands that if I buy the next purchase,
I have some benefits,
and therefore it is not profitable to start a new purchase from a new competitor.
The second is sponsorship programs.
It is the supplier who is interested in sponsoring the enterprise of the buyer in various ways.
Sponsorship programs imply that we participate in some kind of sponsorship activities
to help children, for example, pensioners of this enterprise.
We sponsor various kinds of holidays.
We help those who have left the factory and much more.
The second is a program of stimulation,
which allows to strengthen the emotional attachment of the company's consumer.
I think that this emotional attachment is often explained
when a company starts to create various kinds of training programs,
programs for the development of staff.
Therefore, for example, it is very important in B2B to have such an activity
as, for example, free seminars,
invitation to conferences,
to show that we are not just selling goods,
but we are developing the business,
expanding the idea of the buyer, for example,
about where to go and how to go.
I have had to give a speech at such seminars more than once,
where, as a rule, the suppliers are ready to hold business seminars for their consumers
so that they realize how to work better in the market and how to earn more money.
The supplier is then sure that their sales will increase,
and the consumer's sales will increase, and the supplier's sales will increase.
And the last slide.
And finally, how should differentiation be manifested?
Differentiation in B2B is manifested in the most unpretentious promotion activities,
namely in PR, in newspaper ads, in professional press,
in direct marketing, in reference books, in exhibitions, brochures,
audio and video materials, in various materials of computer order,
in sales promotion and in gifts.
From here, starting from PR, we must feel that the company is differentiated
and all the time reflects its specificity in these advertising materials or promotion materials,
which is excellent for the competitor.
Only then can we say that differentiation in B2B has achieved its result.
It is difficult, but each of these elements should bear the idea, including the slogan,
which is developed on the basis of differentiation.
I have a crown phrase that says that everything good ends.
I have finished my lesson, and in conclusion I want to say that the tools of strategic marketing,
namely segmentation, the choice of target segments and positioning,
are very important tools to create confidence that the company will exist further in the market,
that it will not be swept away by the waves of competition.
Remember my course, when you have to think about what to do with clients,
how to compete with new players that appear on your market.
But the most important thing is that this way you get an unconventional solution,
which is difficult to repeat, because it is more difficult to repeat the intellectual activity of people,
it is easier to repeat the products of technology.
Thank you very much. Good luck in your business.